Okay, thank you again for coming in today.
You're welcome.
Really looking forward to speaking to you.
So, my first question is, can you tell me about your experience of coming to Wales?
When I came to Wales, it's not like the way it is now.
It is so scattered.
There's not too much people.
And I felt it quite silent and ruinous.
We were not many where I was posted or where I was taken.
And now it's a bit easier for me to communicate with people for the last few years.
There are some people coming from all over the world.
And I found it easier for me now to communicate and to interact with various people.
But before, it was not good for me.
When did you come to Wales?
I came to Wales in 2010.
I came from England, though I came to the UK in 2007.
And when I was in England, I got sick.
And I was admitted in the hospital for about four months.
And since I was an immigrant, I had to be brought here to Wales after getting better.
And when I came to Wales, I was placed in a hotel.
And the address of my illness, which was very serious because it was cancer,
I had to be kept in a hotel.
But afterwards, I was considered that I was given a home somewhere in Wales.
And I felt, yeah, I'm safe now.
I can be admitted in my hospital appointment.
So basically, I came to Wales in 2011.
But I landed in England when I came from my country in 2007.
Is there anything more about those journeys or times in your life that you'd like to share?
Yeah, it was not easy for me when I came to England.
Because when I landed, I went through a lot.
Until I was so much stressed.
I was a teacher back in my country.
And when I just decided to come to United, to just like to get away from what I was going through,
I came here and I felt it very hard because I was used to my family.
I left my first check.
My first one was big enough to look after the young ones.
But the last one was just nine years.
And I left her just like that because I was in a hurry to get away from what I was going through.
Within my life, it was just horrible.
So when I came here, it was too hard for me.
As a teacher, you have started from nowhere in this country.
You don't know anybody. You don't know where to start.
Nobody can recognize your qualifications.
So I had to start all over again.
And it was so, so hard for me.
And it took some years.
So that stress between 2000 and 2007, I was misused by so many people.
Come and work for me. I give you food.
Come and do this for me.
I will give you food like two years without knowing where to go.
Until 2009, when I got sick, I was admitted to the hospital.
That is where I stayed for like four months after the operation, after a lot of things was going on.
And when I came from the hospital, I found myself in Wales because the immigration came in.
And I had no where to go.
So according to human rights, they had to take me nowhere to do with me.
And that is how I landed to Wales.
I am a journey from England to Wales.
And I stayed there like some weeks.
They were unable to hire me because of my disease.
That is when I was given a house.
Yeah.
Thank you for sharing that.
Yeah, and when I was in the hospital, I was mistreated.
I have the record. I forgot to carry that book.
I was writing everything that was happening for the day.
I still have that notebook.
Everything is there according to what was going on during the day.
There is a time when I was not given any food.
They could serve all the other patients and then me, I was left because I was the only one.
There was a lot of racism.
So, yeah.
And when I came back to Wales, it was very like our Mureed.
There are not so many people, but the hotel people were very friendly.
Yeah, in Wales, everybody smiles even though they will not speak to you.
If I saw my just smiling like that, I would like to look at you.
I thought it was a home, Wales, like my home.
Yeah.
That's nice.
You said that, you know, things have changed a bit since you came to Wales.
In terms of your relationship with it, could you tell me a bit more about that, how things have changed and how your relationship with Wales has changed?
Yeah.
Compared from 2010, 2011, 2012, from 2013, let me say 2012,
Why I'm saying it's changing because I was back in my mind.
I just want to go back to my get to be myself, a professional forever.
And although I was going to chemotherapy, everything here, I just thought that I want to be somebody.
And so I joined Courage at that is 2012.
I just was passing by as I saw it and I said that I miss my life back in my country.
I miss I was in a college.
I became a teacher. This is another college in Wales.
So I need to start doing about it.
So I just storm in in there.
And I told them, how do we, how can I join the whole, the FIA?
How to go about it?
How to start for the basic?
You have to start to do this or that.
For non-speakers, I said it's all right.
If at all I will be somebody.
That is how I started interacting with the people.
I found people with different opinions from this country, from all over.
I just started my life again.
My life was so nice.
Now I'm in the classroom again.
Seeing somebody teaching me.
I just started comparing my life with who I was the one who was teaching.
Now I'm the one who is somebody like a child.
We started like being told that the heart is under the table.
Those are the things I was teaching young and young children of the environment.
But I had to pass FIA.
I had to take it.
I had to respect what they are saying, what they are telling me.
Until they see that I'm beyond that.
Because I was telling the others, no.
Don't you see they go this, this and this.
You can put them in one word and it's called the funchers.
Then the teachers, anyhow we are teaching and you are telling us more than what you are teaching.
I told them, no.
Because I was a teacher, they told me you don't belong here.
So they advised me to go to the next level.
But I couldn't.
So what I thought they did, they told me.
Can you do diploma in business?
I told them yes.
So I did the diploma in business.
Which was all out of what I know.
Because it's not my career.
I just do it.
And I passed in 2012 and 2013.
And that is how my life started.
Yeah.
And from there, about a few months, I was removed from house to house, house to house.
Then I had to bring my two children who were adult.
And they came and joined me.
After that, regardless of my condition, because the cancer was too much for me.
And then it had spread to the tummy.
They had to put a condition.
So I have a condition.
I have a stomach bug, which I'm managing up to now.
And to the heart of that, I thought that I just want to go to school again.
And that's when I applied for university.
And still I could not be a teacher.
I felt that it's too much for me.
So I told them I just want to do something to do with the community.
Something whereby mix with the community.
I need to, because I was a special need teacher back in my country.
I want to do some things to do with vulnerable people.
That is when I was offered to do health and social care management.
I did my first degree.
I passed very well.
And to come outside is not the way I expected.
There's no job like that.
So I had to do care jobs, support workers.
Although I felt it's okay, because in my church, I was helping those old children, old women.
I could go to their cups, sit down, start eating with them, give them company, chatting.
And I felt that I'm doing something to the community.
And the student, the support worker.
Then that is how I started mixing, seeing life have changed.
Then all of a sudden, my mind again told me, I knew you were a teacher.
I felt that, yes, I was a teacher.
They told me you can't do the classroom setting unless you do masters in something.
They asked me, which area are you in Kenya?
I told them I was dealing with children with autism.
I was offered a place again to do the masters in additional needs.
I did my one year masters and I passed.
I started volunteering in a classroom setting.
Then I felt it is not what I wanted.
I left it.
I started working with the community as a support worker.
Sometimes care.
Yes, that is my life here now.
Then I got this one, the project.
That is how I found that we have changed because I'm doing this, I'm mixing with people.
I am giving to the community.
Before I was like fraught when I gained nothing.
But when I first started with courage, I mixed with people.
We talked, I gained years, I gained years, I gained years.
And now I build that myself.
Now I am in a level where I am not afraid of anybody.
I can approach anybody.
I am given a chance to approach people.
Because things have changed.
Yes.
Good story.
Thank you.
Would you be able to tell me a bit about what home means to you now?
My home.
Although there is upside down.
Because not because I'm not somebody with a system, economic, everything, which is affecting everybody.
To call a home again is not a home to me.
Because back in my country, a home meant that I could go to my garden, pick some food, milk my cows, have my own fresh things.
But nowadays I study in my house and see it's not anymore like the way it was.
Even it achieved from how I came in this country.
It's a bit hard.
And now as a single mom, bringing the two young adults is not easy.
Because in my country, although it has not achieved, you could say stop and they can stop.
Nowadays as a single mom, if you tell them to stop, they have their right to do what they want.
So when you are at home, you don't know how you react, how they react because of the system in here.
So it's a home, but on the other side you have to put the boundaries to call it a home.
You have to use your own techniques.
How old are you, Jody?
One is 20.
The only girl is 25.
And the boy is 29 now.
But I have two more back in Africa.
One is 39, the other one is 35.
Yeah, big family.
It's a big family.
And I had it called too because some are here, some are not.
How often do you go back at all?
The first time we went was about 12.
After 12 years in this country, I went in two years ago to see them.
And then I came back.
And then I lost two of my sisters.
I had to go back.
And yeah, and just recently I lost another one here, my sister.
So yeah.
I'm sorry to hear that.
I'm sorry.
Thank you for sharing all of that really generously.
I wonder, can you tell me a bit about a place or a time in your life that is important to you?
It's when my children join me when I was sick.
And I was waiting for another operation.
I've gone like five operations.
And that one was so hard.
They came in.
And after two months, I was told I will have another major operation.
So my daughter was 14 by then.
But she was there for me.
My son was there for me.
Comparing with previous when I came here, I had nobody.
I knew nobody.
I stayed in the hospital, depending on the hospital food, depending on whoever will spread the mercy.
There is someone who is from this country.
But my children came in.
My first operation was at least, even if I lose my life, my children are here with me.
So that operation I was told it can be 50-50.
And it was true.
And so when it was done, it started to add wheel out.
I became very sick.
And I remember my daughter with me.
They had to find a way of hiding her because they didn't expect what they saw.
So they just get away from this food somewhere.
And I was told that I will go another emergency.
After three days, I was told I will go another major emergency.
They had the first man's tumor, but it didn't work.
So they told me we have to take him back to the hospital and put the man's tumor back.
Because it's not working.
And you are getting worse.
So I was told inform your family.
But don't tell your daughter because it will not be easier.
It is 50-50.
We don't know whether we will succeed.
But when I was operated, when I was operated, when I wake up, I found myself back with the bath.
I was like, what is happening to me?
Nothing is working for you.
But now this will be permanent.
We don't need to risk again.
And I told them, yeah, I'm happy.
It saved my life.
I'm happy.
My family is here.
I can tell them and they can pass the nursing before.
If I die, there's some people to send the nursing.
The most important, why I'm saying this, that one was Muslim or happiest day or something which made me happy.
Because my family was there when I needed them.
Yeah.
Thank you for sharing that.
Okay.
Thank you.
Is there anything else you want to tell me about that time in your life?
I don't think there's anything else.
Yeah.
I wonder if you would like to tell me about your childhood or growing up in Kenya.
Okay.
All I can remember, I was born in 1965.
And we are family of ten, seven girls, three boys.
But now all have gone.
We are left with two of us, the girls, and two boys.
So we are three girls and two boys now.
And I grew up in a village whereby we would do a lot of work fetching water, fetching firewood, a village life.
And I grew up with my siblings, the one who I lost last year.
I was not, we are seven.
I'm the third from the last.
I'm the fourth from the last.
Soon I have lost two other me.
And I lost two.
So five of them have gone.
So four of them have gone.
So yeah, I went to school back in 1974.
I went to primary school.
We could carry them.
My mother was a business woman.
And we could take the bananas, you know, bananas.
So before we go to school, we had to take the bananas to the town city center.
All of us, each with one, each with one, leave them there.
And my mom, because she was having a problem with her legs, she could go and sell during the day.
So we had to, we are taking every day and go to school.
Then in the evening we could fetch firewood, we could fetch water.
And it was a happy life because it's you and your children and you're sharing everything.
Like the way I remember when we were in a museum and somebody talked about sitting in the waterfront.
There's somebody who said about sitting.
We were talking, we were discussing sitting down.
And if you were sitting improperly, your mom could throw something to you.
You knew that it was fun and everything.
And our parents were communicating by hitting you.
Not like now.
So I finished my primary school that way.
The secondary school I went to, unfortunately I went to a day school.
I had to do the same thing, helping my mom to take some stuff to the market, going back to school, coming in the evening.
The worker is waiting for you, fetching firewood.
If there is anything to do, fetching water, doing all sorts of things, then you sleep the same thing, getting this yourself.
Then after that, after my secondary school, I just do some like kashiwaka before I get married.
I got married and I got my children.
And I get married whereby it's not that it was yet time, but because others are doing that, my age meeting, I get married.
I got married that day.
And it's not a first marriage.
It's just for me, just because my friend is doing it.
Nobody to, yeah.
So nobody forced me to do it.
So I got my four children.
And after that, that is how the life started.
Although I went through the college, through as a teacher, my career, I went through a lot.
But the thing is, I could not go back to my parents.
Whenever I go back to my parents, I was told, you have to go back.
Marriage was very respected by them.
Your parents, you stay two, three days to tell you have to go back.
They come, they will see you have to go back.
Every time you go, you have to go back.
Until I found that enough is enough.
I have to take my children.
Maybe they will join me later.
Maybe somebody will take care of them.
I left them and I made my decision to come to the UK.
So that is how my life was.
A bit of the beat of my life.
Yeah.
Thank you for sharing all of that.
I wonder if you could tell me about a, you have told me about one important moment with your children coming to be with you.
Is there another maybe a magic moment when something changed for you?
I don't know.
Here in the UK?
That can be, it can also be previously.
It can be any time in your life.
Just something that felt magic, that felt something was changing.
Yeah.
To me, let me say, as I said before, I had no voice.
But after mixing with people, after talking with people, like here in Bowser, it gave me more confidence.
When I started this project, this is my first project.
I started it like very low.
I didn't know what to do.
Sometimes I was like, where am I?
What is this?
Although I had been doing a lot of projects during my courses and during my whatever, it's not like this one.
This is my first one to work for it for money.
So, but there is a time I can say that I feel that I have the confidence to speak.
I have a confidence to say, no, I can't do it.
I have a confidence to say this, I'm doing the project to tell some people when I say that it's succeeding,
it's that I'm getting what is going on.
Now I have the courage to tell people I'm doing a project.
And I told some people, some people try to, if you go to Bowser or Google, see their jobs, if it's something to do the project, pick it.
It's not a big, big, big thing.
It's something you can do it.
And that moment make me feel that I'm somebody I can talk.
I feel even now, that is why I'm talking to you in a corner.
And before I was like, no, but now I can face anybody.
I can talk to any group.
Before I was tiptoeing to come to Bowser, now I open the door.
It's my right to be open the door for me.
I'm doing something, you see.
This is some of the magic.
This is like a magic to me.
And I can face another one and another project.
And I feel that I had told people apply, some applied and got the jobs.
Yeah, not in the project, but in some failures.
Because they are seeing this, it's not something they can be able to do.
I'm telling them, don't sit there.
Go, try, they will help you.
It's like magic to me.
It's like a magic.
That's amazing.
That's fantastic.
That does really sound magical.
Yeah.
Okay.
Could you tell me about your hopes for the future?
What are your hopes for the future?
One, I have no permanent job.
It's something I was doing on a piece of paper last night in my house.
I was like, where am I heading?
So in future, unless I volunteer, I don't feel like I can do any stressful job.
I just want to do like volunteering things.
If I don't get something for myself, I think I have done enough.
In my country, I worked for 18 years as a teacher.
I have so much in my head with the children.
Here I'm working with the grown-up, vulnerable people.
Sometimes too much for me, but I feel I'm passionate about it.
I feel I have to do it.
But in future, I just want to have something just for me,
but to do with vulnerable people, but not somebody and offer me to tell them that it's a deadline.
There is a deadline.
There I need my peace of life and something I can do with two or three people.
If at all I don't get the council to give me just three vulnerable people,
old, either old or those with disabilities, and sit with them in their houses, house accommodation.
Sit with them.
Do paperwork for them.
Me, myself, send it to the council, say this one, do the care plan, everything, assessment.
In future, it will be something like that.
If it will not work, I give it to somebody else, but I know I have something which is going on.
Is it that you'd like to have your own organization or company?
It's a company.
It's like a company.
Just for accommodation, accommodated living, supported living.
Wherever I get in, find them, they are here.
We talk, they want to go somewhere, that sort of things.
Or a house with just three old women, you know, and some people who would like to be, just to sit with them.
We meet, we talk, we do the various things.
Word, pencil, everything, things like that.
So you'd like to support them in their accommodation?
Yeah.
Sounds great.
Yeah, that is it.
In future, not in future, that's why I say that.
My time is like, happy now.
So it's something which I'm thinking of now.
You said you want like your peace of life, you know, peaceful times.
Is there anything else that helps you to feel at peace that you enjoy doing?
How does you feel peaceful?
Gardening.
In my house, I plant my own vegetables.
That's most of the time in my compound.
Then from there, I either walk and wait for...
I walk and I like walking.
In the bushes, I hear the birds sound, those things.
But I don't like mixing with so many people.
For one reason is the coordination.
My coordination, if I sit for a long time with the people in a group, I have to tell them,
if you hear my sound, my tummy making, this, that, I have the coordination.
I don't want that.
So that's why I say that.
Just one or two or three, we may tell them, I have this.
If you hear something, it's my stomach.
But a logical is very hard to explain.
Yeah.
Sounds like a great idea for the future.
So is there anything else you'd like to tell me or share that you feel is important for
people to know about you and your life?
Anything important.
Yeah.
Is there anything else that you'd like to tell us about your life that you think is
important for people to know, to have on this record of your life?
Is there anything else you'd like to tell us?
To take each other at a time.
People should not, that's me.
I always say that.
Take that day you are there.
You either do something for yourself or for the people.
If you don't do something for yourself, do it for the people.
And that's something which will be remembered in future and say, yes, Annie did this for
us.
And if you feel there is something which is inside, you take it out.
Let people know.
And yeah, that is it.
That's beautiful.
Thank you.
So that's it for the questions for the interview.
I thought now we could just go over the museum visits again.
And if you wanted to tell any of those stories again or add anything, you know, what are
the things you saw?
What are the memories you had?
I'd love to just make sure we've got that properly on the audio.
When we are visiting the museum for the first time at Waterfront, you know, I was saying
that like I am going there to take the women to see the museum.
Then when we went there, I was like, oh, so even me, there is some things I'm learning
from there.
I started to get the interest of the museum.
What is there?
What is happening?
And when the lady started telling about the things, I became more and more interested.
The first thing which caught my eyes is the typewriter.
When I saw that typewriter, it gave me a memory back in my ears when I finished secondary
school.
And I remember when I finished my secondary school, the first thing I told my parents
that I want to be a secretary.
Then I went to a college called Peteyman in Nairobi.
I went there and I was enrolled.
And when I saw that computer, I remember the ones we are using, they were using some ink
long, long time ago.
That is about 20 or 30, that is about 45 years ago.
They were using the ink.
And that gave me a nice memory.
I was going to Nairobi Street.
Nairobi is the capital city of Kenya.
The way I was going to the street, just to type, it was making some noise.
All your type in here.
That gave me a very nice memory.
And I was like, so I can then see something like this here in the UK.
And I remember asking you whether this is the same Peteyman, whether it's the same in
my country, Nairobi.
And you give me the feedback and you told me it's the same.
And that thing has made me proud that I started 45 years ago and now I can see it somewhere.
In Kenya, they were disposing of it.
You can't get them.
You won't see them anywhere.
But I was happy to see that one.
That is the Waterfront Museum.
Can you tell me a bit more about how it felt to type on it?
What did it feel like?
Just wait for this noise to stop now.
Gosh, it's very noisy here today, isn't it?
A ton of noise.
The one which was here, all the way I was doing it back then.
The one you could remember?
Yeah.
It was nice because even when you are in a very, very low mood, you know it was making
very, I have told you it was making that noise.
That, that, that, that.
You know, it's like giving you some, even if you come home and you feel that, when you
come home to the college and you feel that you cannot do it, the way everybody was doing
it is you are making fun of each other.
It's like a keyboard, you know?
And so that gave me a memory of the happiness, gave you back your sense, gave you back your
happiness.
Yeah, it was nice.
And that is why when I saw it here I felt that, yeah, it's something which can give
me the memories of my country and my childhood, not childhood really, that youthiness.
Yeah.
Yeah, that you'd be feeling youthful?
That's great.
What else did you see that sparked memories for you?
Yeah, waterfront.
Waterfront museum in Soansea.
There is also a locomotive.
Yeah.
It was there, isn't it?
And we are told that you are using the solar.
Then I remember I asked them what happens if they, like in our house, back in Kenya,
if we put the solar and there is no light, I mean there is no sun, we are in darkness,
although it's not fully darkness, you cannot see enough light because they are using the
solar with the sunlight they see.
And I was thinking about it because they say that it was, you can go and Google about it
that in the, that Soansea, it is here, but I can't do it.
It is in my phone.
Yeah.
This one.
Ah, yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, you see?
So did you have solar in Kenya?
For the houses, for the light.
Yeah.
Before there was electricity, we are using solar.
Then I was thinking about this thing.
If it was using solar to go all the way, what about if there is a, like I was asking if
it is like the one we are using in Kenya and there is no sun that day, so we are using
the light firewood to see through.
What about this one?
If it's on the way and it stops, what will happen?
Will it be the end of the journey?
I don't know.
So I need something to know more about it.
Unfortunately, I didn't get in, but tell me what will happen.
But then this is like, I just compared to the journey with women who come to the bowser.
When coming from their country, they feel that it's taking me, I was like, it's the end
of me.
Now I have to start all over again.
Some of them came to seek the relief to the bowser, but they started their life again,
though up and down.
They finally go to where they are supposed to be, through bowser.
So they, from the darkness to the light again.
The same thing is with this one.
If it stops, there must be something because there is a lot of technologies in this country.
There is a way to go through to the other side.
So I was thinking of comparing that to it.
That's a lovely metaphor.
Yeah.
It's a beautiful metaphor you're saying that there's always more sunlight coming.
Yeah, they use the solar system.
So you think bowser is like the solar power?
Yeah, it's like the solar power to where it is.
Not really, but yeah, it is because the women come here thinking that outside there, they
don't think that their life will be the same.
Maybe some of them going to the next of our ends, FGM, all sorts of things.
But then they come to bowser, they met that faces, that people who cared for them, that
people you tell them what to do.
You can get the money, you can seek the work, you can do this.
And their life starts again.
Until then they leave the bowser and start their life in a bright way, you see.
So it's like this anyway, because it can stop anywhere.
And then they do their technology and they can start again.
That's beautiful.
Yeah.
That's really beautiful.
Thank you for that.
That's great because a lot of people would walk past that and they wouldn't really think
about it.
Yeah, it's not using the petrol rapper.
You can learn it.
They have to use some things of which I don't know.
But to me it's a solar system.
Something which is telling me it's to do with the nature, is it?
Solar power.
So it absorbs the rays of the sunlight.
And then they have little cells, little cells that can absorb that and convert the UV rays
into electricity.
That's how it works.
So yeah.
It needs the sun rays.
No, it needs the sun rays, yeah.
But there's no sun rays somewhere.
It stores it.
Yeah, okay.
What will happen is it will store the energy.
Or if it's quite sort of basic technology, it will just run on what it has.
So for example, if it's not sunny that day, it won't work.
But a lot of bigger technologies, they'll have the ability to store it.
Okay.
But your metaphor still works because what you're saying is that even if the sunlight
runs out, it always comes back.
There's always a new beginning.
There's always hope.
Yeah.
And places like Baozhou provide that hope and that sun ray.
That is it.
Yeah.
So that's lovely.
Thank you.
I love that.
Anything else from the museum?
From museum, that was a typewriter from there.
There is another one in this one from the St. Fagans, I think.
Yes.
Yeah, that's St. Fagans.
This is the type of fire we use.
Yeah.
Oh, can I see?
Oh, from the bakery.
Yeah.
Now, when I saw this, I just remember how I was baking for my children.
Most of the food we could call for rich people.
Because I was a teacher, students were coming to eat in my house, and they thought the chapati.
You have heard of chapati?
The flat bread?
The flat bread was for the rich people, the teachers.
The only people, the rich people, they can't cook that one.
It was so expensive.
And this one, I was baking.
I was rolling.
I was doing the balls and keeping them.
I was counting.
I have four children.
This is for my four children.
This is for to take to school for the children who will not be having some food.
And this is to keep for the morning.
So this one, the way they put the balls, it's not here.
It's not showing.
I think I printed one.
There are some balls here.
We were counting when cooking.
The dough?
The dough, yeah.
We were counting when cooking.
You should make sure the dough will come back five, according to the children, they have 111, and to give out like five, 111.
So this one, it made me of how I was doing it.
It was some memories which gave me.
And so I can see those children now which I was giving there because they were so poor.
Now they are the people with so many big, big things back in Kenya.
They didn't go to secular school.
They didn't need to go to secular school.
Their parents had no money, but they needed to do the business to make them people.
They are very, very rich.
So when I saw this, I was like, maybe I should do the bit so that it can fit for my children.
If I see it's not fit, I started moving some of the dough from here, here, here, here to make another dough so that when cooking, it will be enough for the children.
But if I got Kenya, those are the people I can see.
Even they are doing better than me.
So do you mean that you would have a ball and then you'd split it and just make it go farther?
Yeah.
So you would call it a dough ball?
A dough ball, those balls.
I have to cut it again until I get that round.
If I do it, if I lift it, it will be small.
Everybody will have a piece, a piece, a piece, a piece.
So why was chapati so expensive?
Because I always thought that that was sort of an affordable food.
Why was chapati so expensive?
It's because by then it was for the rich people.
It was very expensive.
Even if you hear the smell from afar, the poor children from the poor families could just pass by your house, up and up, up and down, until you tell them to come for the piece.
It was for even us to get when we were growing.
It was a magic.
Yeah, it was very expensive.
Very, very expensive.
The wheat, the flour.
Yeah, the flour, yeah.
And is there any kind of fat in it as well, like a butter or an oil?
Oil, we cook with oil.
We fry with oil in the pan.
You can go and see how.
If you see them go out to cook chapati, you will see it.
It was very nice.
And I know I don't do it because if you do it, the wheat here is not like the wheat we are growing back in our country.
I have to be careful if you have cancer, genes, you need to be very careful with some of the things.
But some of the foods?
Yeah.
Some of the things like wheat, processed meat, like sausages, bacon.
Yeah, those things are not good for the cancer patient.
Yeah, those are the kind of things I was told to keep away.
Interesting.
I had a housemate, I used to have a housemate from Tanzania, she would make chapati.
Wow, yeah, they know how to do it.
It's really good.
Yeah.
Really good with curries and everything.
Yeah, this is the commandant.
I just closed this bridge for a purpose.
This bridge was there from the museum building to go to where our bus was.
We closed the bridge.
I was thinking about it and I had to call somebody from very far to take me a photo.
I was thinking about the, I thought about how we close out, how we were ready to come into my commandant.
You see, we were very late, so we didn't go back in the commandant, you remember?
There was a lot of stuff which went on in the morning, then in the evening we had not much to talk about in commandant, if you remember very well.
So when I was closing this bridge, I just looked under the water.
You see that there was enough, there was not much in that building, it's just to do the wool.
But it gave me a memory of the skirt.
I, I, the, by then the wool is that, if a girl happened to wear a woolen, you are so expensive.
So we are going to various centers.
We went like this here, we call them charity.
Ours was not a charity, it was like somewhere nearby, close come from various outside the Kenya,
and they were put somewhere, people buy and sell it to the other people.
So the center charity here.
So we were taken every Saturday to check whether we would get a woolen.
We don't know where we are coming from.
So when I saw that skirt, I remembered the first time I bought a woolen, it was my, I went to face my boyfriend,
and he was so happy because I'm wearing a woolen and whatever.
Then when my mum, my mum discovered that I went to see the boyfriend, I was in the second school,
I was beaten and beaten and my mother threw the woolen, that woolen skirt away and told me you never wear it again.
When I saw that, that woolen again in the command, and I was like, this give me a memory.
I went to see my boyfriend, my mother beat me and threw my woolen again.
Though I cannot get that one, it gave me that memory center.
Yeah.
I was thinking about this earlier.
I was thinking about when you told that story, you know, we were all laughing because it was so the idea of you being in a sort of dusty,
you know, Nairobi street with these woolen skirts, you know, going around.
Yeah, and it was, yeah.
And because it is woolen, somebody was like, woolen skirt, woolen skirt.
And that one is not like the nowadays whereby men are attracted by seeing something, sort something.
Now, by our time, it's the kind of dress, it's woolen, even if it is dirty, the fit is very nice, you see.
Yeah.
So it strikes me as a mixed memory because then you said your mum, your mother was physically, hurt you physically.
So our parents were very strict.
In comparing with the woolen nowadays, it was, it was a, this spring was there, but not anymore.
That's what I told you when we, when we started the inter-internet, a home, you have to put a bridge, call it a home when you are with the youth or dealing with youth.
Yeah.
Otherwise, you know, it can be, you can lose your home anytime.
Anytime you try to strike, he call the police.
You know what you call the police, you see, and you might lose your children.
So you have to, there is a bridge whereby you can close and where you cannot close.
In our days, our, my mum threw my skirt away just because it's the one which attracted the man to, yeah, because it was expensive, it was woolen, it was, yeah, by then.
Why do you think wool was so attract, was so, you know, why was wool sexy?
Why was wool...
I don't know why, it's like fashion.
It was fashion, the way you see something in fashion, but in the next few years, it's same.
Yeah, so woolen was on fashion back when I was growing, woolen, it was very uncommon to find an woolen skirt, woolen things, yeah.
So it was fashionable at that time.
Was it very hot to wear it?
It was hot, but regardless, even when it's hot, you could wear it to tell people you are wearing an woolen, hot or woolen skirt.
And that is the most thing we could wear to go and get, go to our boyfriend.
Yeah, very expensive, but...
Is there anything else you wanted to share?
Nordic Weavers. Nordic Weavers gave me a...
Oh, yeah.
You know the Sreti Museum?
The Sreti Museum was marvelous, it was nice.
The man who was doing the Sreti, there, they told us the rocks or whatever they called them, it came from there, all allowed somewhere there.
I thought when I went outside, I looked at the hill somewhere, this one.
Then I was thinking about my life.
Yeah, I looked at it, the edge, and the man told us these things come from there.
I was, I just was like, believing he was copying the...
That thing. He got it like, surplus, you know, because when you get a log, it's a, it's a, it's something which you cannot admire, the log, according to me.
But that man, the way he was cutting it, he was making some things with very beautiful, he shaped that log, the logs and the, the logs, and it was so, it looks something very nice.
I, I thought about it, about the life I started.
I started my life when I was very hungry.
Then I was like, a log.
Somebody put my life like, nobody could admire me, admire me, nobody could like, you know, because I was so mistress.
Then I came to UK.
I, you know, I had to run away and come to UK.
With that shape.
And I had to put myself in it.
Then I got the problems, I started like, I started the, I had cancer.
And I was operated.
By that, I was thinking about it.
When I came out from the museum, I was thinking about it.
I want to take me a photo of what it feels like to me.
My life, the way here, this is logs.
They are shapeless.
I could see that life, that it's my life, this is the life I, it was like.
Then somebody came back in man.
The logs was taken and the man started shaping and shaped something very nice.
Although I had the stomach, I remembered that.
Although what I went through in my life, it didn't take my heart.
I was given a heart.
You see, I see this didn't break my heart.
That's so beautiful.
Thank you for sharing that.
Everyone really loved those, didn't they?
I think that was a really powerful gesture, wasn't it?
Yeah, it was.
And the man doing it, you know.
Sometimes can be shaped and they can be like logs.
And somebody can put it together.
Shape, you can see, you're doing it like that.
But once you are given like this, I was like.
Then I look at the logs, where they see that the logs come from locally.
I could see those logs.
Then they take the logs, they shape them and, you know, it was so lovely.
Yeah, that is it.
Yeah, amazing.